>> I'm Sally Tracy, professor of
midwifery at Sydney University.
I was educated as a
midwife in New Zealand,
and then I studied
for my masters
in London, where I
met some of the stars
of the midwifery scene.
And then I came
back to New Zealand
and then back home to Australia.
I was born in Australia and
brought up in the bush actually
but having spent 25
years away and looking
at the way midwifery is
offered in all of those years.
When I came back to Australia
after traveling and being away
for 25 years, I felt
I couldn't practice
as a midwife in Australia.
I was so horrified
with the way birth
had remained if you
like under the influence
of the vested interests
that I actually
felt there was no place for
midwifery in the way I wanted
to practice in Australia.
So I made a decision
to go into research.
And that's where
I've been ever since.
You look at the maternity
scene in Australia.
And the lack of women's
voices, the lack of
control that women
have over their birth,
the control that people--
that is vested in both medicine
and business absolutely
convinced me that we had to find
a way of getting information
for women so that
they could politically
change this environment because
that's the only way I think
women will wrest back any
control over their birth
experience.
Information from research is
only one part of the equation,
but it's a very powerful part.
And it is something that is--
I think actually
it's worth doing.
It's worth doing in
the maternity system
because, for example,
women are convinced
that they go to hospital.
And they have an obstetrician.
And they're guided basically
by medical principles in birth.
There has never been a
randomized control trial
of obstetric care in birth.
There has never even been
an observational study
that provides women with data
about their outcomes in birth
if they are cared for by
a private obstetrician
or by any obstetrician
for that matter.
So my absolutely burning
aim was to seek funding,
which we have managed to do, and
to set up a randomized control
trial of offering women
midwifery care in birth.
There's probably never been a
study done on obstetric care
because actually that
lobby if you like
don't have to be accountable.
They're already
supported by industry.
They're supported by the
authority that medicine holds.
And they don't actually
have to be accountable.
Women don't go and ask,
what are your outcomes
or should I go to
an obstetrician?
They're told that it's safe
to go to an obstetrician.
They're told that
that's the best
way that they can give birth.
And they're actually convinced
that anything else isn't
safe for them and their baby.
So in a way, these people
have been handed this mantle
to provide care in maternity
without any evidence sitting
under it.
Australia is the last bastion
of the Western world where
medicine holds such power.
I think even the US is more
accountable to the population
than medicine is in Australia.
And we've just had
maternity reforms.
Women are the losers.
Women completely lost out in the
Commonwealth maternity reforms.
A home birth was this far
from being criminalized.
We're no closer to women having
the choice of having a midwife
and giving birth in a place they
want to give birth than we were
before the maternity reforms.
And this is because
we are absolutely
beholden to industry and the
vested interests of medicine.
They have the loudest voice.
They have the most power.
And we are fighting
an uphill battle
to try and even argue that
birth is a physiological event
that women actually
have some say in where
they want to do it.
And Australia sits in stark
contrast to New Zealand.
Because if you look at
the reforms around birth
in New Zealand-- and we were
all in much the same position
20 years ago.
I mean, 0.3% of women gave
birth at home at that time.
And we're still there.
But in New Zealand, they
had a visionary woman
who was the health
minister who later
became the prime minister.
Her whole cabinet, every
woman in that parliament,
crossed the floor
to vote that women
should have the choice of where
to give birth and with whom.
And it was as simple as that.
If you come back to
Australia, our reforms--
the government took
advice from the AMA.
They took advice from
all the colleges.
I sat at the table where we
were supposed to be working up
how these reforms should work.
2/3 of the people
around that table
represented the
interests of medicine.
We had two consumers.
And we had about three midwives.
So we lost it.
It's almost a novelty to say to
people that women can actually
make decisions and
weigh up the evidence
and decide for themselves.
The media constantly
convinces women
that they're unsafe in birth
and that they need hospitals.
They need doctors and they
need midwives in hospital.
I want to be able to
present information
that is accessible for women
to make up their own mind.
If I achieve nothing
else in this life,
I want to be able to present
information that is accessible.
I may have to publish in
the "Women's Weekly" and not
the "British Medical Journal."
Whatever it takes.
But women given the
information will actually
be able to make these
decisions for themselves.
And at the moment, most
of that information
is hidden from them partly
because the research has never
been done.
I have two main areas
where my research
is focused at the moment.
One is set in the
public hospital
where every woman has access
to health care in Australia.
I mean, we are the lucky
country in this sense.
So what I want to
do is make sure
that every woman who comes
into a public hospital
is able to find a midwife
who she can get to know.
She can form some sort
of relationship with.
And when she comes
in to give birth,
she's not going to be afraid.
She's not going to
be among strangers.
And she's going to be able
to give birth in privacy
with someone who she
can really trust.
And post-natally, I'd hope
that those women can go home
from hospital as soon as
possible and the midwife
visit them at home.
So the research I'm doing at
the moment is looking at--
is researching how
well that system works,
how safe is it for women,
whether in fact they
have less Cesarean
sections, whether they're
able to breastfeed at the end
of the birthing experience,
and actually how they feel
about their own health
once they've given birth.
The other main area of
research I have at the moment
is evaluating the little
primary cottage birth units,
the standalone birth units.
Because it's a quantum
shift for women to,
within our society where
they're told to be so afraid,
it's a quantum shift
for them to think, well,
I can just give birth at home.
But what they can
do is give birth
in a little cottage
hospital where
it's a halfway house, if you
like, between the main hospital
where everything
pings and whistles
and home where we
don't have much,
but the cottage hospital where
the midwife and things look
a little bit more
like sort of there
could be some help
around the corner.
So my research is evaluating
the primary units.
And in Australia at the
moment, we've only got two.
New Zealand have 56.
But I guess that's a comment
on the state of things
in this country.
Maternity care
all over the world
has really suffered from
the control of medicine
and vested interests
to some extent.
I think there's one
place in the world where
there's hope actually
for women giving birth.
And it's just across the Tasman.
New Zealand has the
most astonishing system
for maternity.
Most of the world
doesn't know it.
And they themselves
don't often know it.
I've taught students who
have only known this system.
And they go, well, what's
so special about it?
It is very special.
And it's very, very
special because the control
has been put in the hands
of the woman who is pregnant
and her family.
And by doing that,
the government
has vested women with the--
finally with the ability
to choose a midwife
if they want to,
choose a doctor if they
want to, to give birth at home.
They might be progressing
in their labor.
And they feel that
perhaps things aren't
going as well as they should.
Let's go to hospital.
There's no problem with that.
So the women actually
have the control
alongside their midwife
to give birth in the way
that they want to.
I was horrified
when I arrived back
in Australia to hear that--
and it was before
a senate inquiry
that in fact, we had these
really high levels of Cesarean
section and instrumental birth
because women were older.
And they were sicker.
And they absolutely needed to
have private obstetric care.
And it just-- it
didn't make sense.
It didn't make sense.
So we actually did
the research on that.
And we looked at women
who were considered
to be without risk factors who
didn't appear to have anything
that would be untoward
in their pregnancy
or to do with their health.
And we looked at what happened
to them when they gave birth
in the public hospital.
And we actually looked
at three levels of care.
So we looked at those women who
came into the public hospital
and gave birth, those women who
came in to the public hospital
and had a private
obstetrician, and then
women who went to
a private hospital
and had a private obstetrician.
And the results were horrifying.
And what we found
was that women who
had paid through the nose
for this expensive care
with a private obstetrician
in a private hospital
were having more than double
the rates of intervention.
What was silent in
that research was
what I've discovered
since then, which
was the admission of
babies to neonatal unit.
And these are the silent
costs in our system
that no one is asking
questions about.
But what we know
is that babies who
are born to women again who
have no risks in pregnancy
and birth because
of the intervention,
because of the induction,
because of the augmentation,
because of all of the fiddling
around with their labor
and their being in hospitals
where they can't labor well,
these women are having Cesarean
sections or instrumental
births.
And their babies
are flat at birth.
And they're going to
the neonatal unit.
Now, this sounds quite
benign in itself,
but we're separating
mothers from their babies.
Women who give birth who had no
idea that their baby wouldn't
be safe at the end of
it, they've gone in,
had an elective
Cesarean section,
and suddenly, their
baby's whisked away
to the neonatal unit because
it's having trouble breathing.
Now, no one told them that
that was a possibility.
Nobody.
So these are the things
that our research
has to find out for
women so that women
have got this information.
They know they're three
times more likely to go
to a neonatal unit if
they have their baby
by elective Cesarean section.
It's as simple as
that in Australia.
So that's something to
weigh up, especially
if you want to be with your baby
and have skin to skin contact.
And you want to breastfeed it.
And actually, you only had
an elective Cesarean section
because, well, it suited
your lifestyle at that time.
You would reconsider
those things
if you had the information.
And that's what we hope to do--
give women this information.
The important thing is
not to act or vilify
the Cesarean section as such.
The important
thing is that women
know this is a possibility.
If their birth is not
happening as it should be,
there is the possibility
of a Cesarean section,
which is in Australia
a very safe operation.
Where we're going wrong is by
normalizing Cesarean section
for women to think that
having a Cesarean section
is a perfectly normal
way to give birth.
And there is more
and more evidence
now to say that this is
actually not the case.
We've got superb studies
coming from Oxford
showing that the bugs in
the mother's gut somehow
quite mysteriously switch on
the immune response of the baby.
We know that the
rates of diabetes
are being affected by the
way babies are being born.
So what we do have to have
is information for women
to know that, yes, a cesarean
is a very real possibility.
It's a very real
probability in some births.
But it's not a normal
way to give birth.
And given that
information, women
will make a decision about what
they want to do in this case.
What we don't have in
Australia is really robust data
about the safety of home birth.
And so it's very easy
to demonize something
because we don't have the data.
Interestingly, we don't
demonize obstetric care,
even though we don't have
the randomized control
trial on obstetric care.
It's very easy to
demonize home birth.
Because after all, women
are choosing home birth.
And there is that
perception that women
aren't choosing what's best
for themselves and their baby.
It's something that is going
to take many years for us
to change.
But it's actually being
able to believe in women,
that women actually
know what to do,
and trusting them to do that.
In a country like Australia that
is so obsessed by the market,
by making money, by the whole--
we're a very proud
industrial country
and hugely resource rich--
it's so interesting that the
bottom line in maternity care
is never considered.
What research shows-- and this
was research that was done over
a decade ago--
was that the more
interventions you
bring into the birth process,
the higher the cost will be.
And it's a cost that is related
to the way women give birth,
how long they might stay
in hospital, what sort
of interventions are required.
So if you add inductions,
you add epidurals,
you end up with a much higher
rate of instrumental birth
or Cesarean section.
So these are the things that
actually add to the cost.
The argument leveled
at the rising
rates or the
cascade of invention
is that women need these things.
And it's a very--
it is quite a subtle
thing actually.
If you have women who
come into a hospital who
don't know anybody,
certainly don't
know who's going to
be looking after them,
the smells are very different
to home and outside.
There's a natural fear.
There's a natural
anxiety that builds up.
And so what we find
is that if women
coming into these
huge factories really
suffer all sorts of things
that actually affect the birth
process.
Now, I can say this
now because we're
doing a randomized
control trial, which
is looking at what happens
when women don't come straight
into hospital when they
think they're in labor?
They ring their midwife.
The midwife might even
visit them and see
whether they're in labor.
And if they are in
labor, they come in.
For the women who don't have
that who come into hospital,
the minute they think
they're in labor,
they'll ring and be
told, well, come on in,
those women often sit
in the labor ward.
Their labor doesn't progress
for whatever reason.
And so following a certain time
interval, the clock's ticking.
And on comes the intervention.
So they'll have an induction.
They'll have a augmentation.
The labor will be hurried up.
And then, of course, that
causes quite a lot of pain
that's different to your normal
sort of rhythmic labor pain.
And so epidural's called.
And then once the
epidural's in, the labor
may still not progress.
And many more women end
up having an instrumental
birth or a Cesarean section.
What we've been
able to show then
is not so much that women need
this level of intervention,
but that it's occurring
because of the way
we're actually managing the
way birth is undertaken,
the way women are giving birth.
And so if we can change
that, what we're trying to do
is to actually match the sort
of care we're offering women
to the rhythm, the
natural rhythm of birth
and women's rhythms.
So if the woman
comes into labor,
she can probably stay at
home for several hours
and labor at home in her own
bed or in her own kitchen,
wherever, with her children.
And then when she
does need to come in,
she can come in then for
a short period of time,
give birth, and go
home with her midwife.
And changing that
is actually changing
hugely the rates of intervention
and Cesarean section.
The only reason Australia has
such high intervention rates
and high Cesarean
section rates really
is because people are convinced
that this probably saved
their baby or saved their life.
The argument is that if you
hadn't been in hospital, if you
hadn't been able to have
this level of intervention,
or this medication,
the Cesarean section,
either you or your
baby might have died.
What we need here is research
for women to understand
and families to understand that
this is probably not the case,
but we can't--
I can't sit here and
say that's not the case.
But our research is showing
that that is not the case.
And our research is
actually showing really
what the WHO have
been saying all along.
And that is that the Cesar rate
should not be sitting probably
above 15% and that mortality
and morbidity is not necessarily
improved by these rising
rates of Cesarean section.
And I think our research will
actually show that very, very
categorically that without
intervention, with being
able to give birth without
fear, is probably actually going
to lower the Cesarean section
rate more than anything else.
Coming to birth in
a hospital is not
just about the loss of
control, but think of the cost.
Think of the cost of giving
birth at home compared
to giving birth in this
huge institution that
runs on thousands
of dollars an hour.
It doesn't make sense.
It doesn't make
sense that we don't
look at ways of
promoting, on the one
hand, this wonderful way of
giving birth that doesn't cost
an arm and a leg compared to
this huge industry of hospital
and technological medicine.
I think the one
reason in Australia
why we don't do this, why
we don't explore this,
is because there is so
much tied up in industry.
It comes back to the market.
It's the vested interests.
People really profit out of
keeping births in hospital.
They don't profit when women
take that control and that cost
themselves and
give birth at home.
But in Australia, we
don't ask those questions
because actually we
haven't really had to.
There's plenty of money.
It keeps rolling.
If it doesn't come
through Medicare,
it comes through private
health insurance.
It gets subsidized.
Doctors make
millions and millions
out of looking after
women who have no need
at all to be looked after
by doctors in birth.
But it's a business.
And it brings in a lot of money.
And really to take
that on, you have
to be fairly stupid
or very clever.
I mean, the AMA is the
strongest, most powerful union
in this country.
And it's this power of
medicine, of industry,
of the market that actually
drives this country.
Having said that the
government-- that the way
birth is actually-- or
the maternity system
in this country is run by
these powerful lobbies,
I think it's also important
to say that as midwives, we
could fall into
exactly the same trap.
And in fact, we
could have it leveled
that midwifery is trying to
build up the power for itself.
I think the very
important issue here is,
and one that I feel absolutely
as if my whole life works on,
is that women themselves are
our best teachers around birth.
If we listen to the
woman, we'll know what
to do as a caregiver in birth.
This happens in home,
in hospital, anywhere.
The other thing is that if
we provide the information,
the women can make that choice
about who they want to go to.
And I think that's where we
haven't come in Australia.
So we do have vested interests.
We do have the possibility of
midwifery actually becoming
just another vested interest.
The saving grace is
if we keep our focus
on what it is that women want
when they're giving birth
and give--
allow those women to have the
control of that experience
themselves with their family,
with their partner, then
that's what will shape
our maternity care.
That's where we
need to be shaped.